hi everyone my name is Dr Mark enson
welcome to heal NPD to assess
personality we need to ask two questions
first what is the personality style are
they depressive avoidant paranoid
narcissistic Etc the second question is
about severity what is the person's
overall level of distress and
dysfunction in this video we'll take a
closer look at the narcissistic
personality style in its most severe
form called psychotic personality
organization
so let's get
[Music]
started personality is best understood
as a complex set of adaptations we
develop ways of getting our
psychological needs met and ways of
protecting ourselves from harm many of
these adaptations are made in early
childhood and they're based on the
intersection between genetics and
experience we end up with one or more
dominant personality Styles these are
characteristic ways of thinking feeling
perceiving and behaving that are defined
by core conflicts and Central beliefs
that each of us has about ourselves and
about other people the narcissistic
personality style involves adaptations
around the issue of self-esteem to
defend against self-esteem collapse
defenses are utilized that seek
self-esteem inflation these defensive
adaptations protect the self and attempt
to compensate for internal self-esteem
resources that are otherwise lacking the
effectiveness of these defenses mostly
depends on the level of dysfunction in
the personality individuals on the
healthier end of the narcissistic
Spectrum tend to utilize flexible
defenses that help them resolve
conflicts while increasing social
support individuals at the more severe
end tend to use defenses that are
disruptive to their daily lives damaging
to their relationships and even ones
that distort reality all of this is tied
to a person's developmental maturity and
the severity of the disturbances that
are caused by the central conflict
around self-esteem as someone moves up
the spectrum of Developmental maturity
their use of problematic defenses goes
down and this is true for any
personality style not just narcissistic
the more integrated stable and defined
our self-image the less we need to rely
on reality distorting boundary blurring
or truth obfuscating defenses
this developmental spectrum is defined
by several distinct levels of
Personality organization Each of which
contain a developmental challenge that
must be successfully negotiated to move
to the next level the first challenge is
learning to tolerate reality this level
is called psychotic organization
psychotically organized individuals have
difficulty maintaining a consistent
perception of what's real images of the
self and of other people are subject to
extreme distortions and the personality
is chronically overwrought by its own
preoccupations and anxieties typically
concerning loss of self the next
challenge involves recognizing that the
self is separate from other people this
level is called borderline organization
and it's typically marked by profound
confusion about boundaries between the
self and others borderline psychologies
also struggle with internal consistency
utilizing a defense called splitting
which collapses ambiguity and
ambivalence into simplified
polarizations that are either all good
or all bad these are also sometimes
called part objects as with psychotic
organizations borderline organizations
are dominated by anxiety about loss of
self and the clinical term for this is
paranoid
anxiety the main developmental task in
borderline organizations is called
individuation it's how we emerge as a
separate self with a stable integrated
identity next the personality moves from
split-off part object relationships to
integrated whole object relationships
and this level is called neurotic
organization here a person's identity is
integrated and individuated they also
have mostly stable integrated images of
other people at this level defenses
focus on defending loved ones from
fantasized harm caused by the
individual's angry feelings or
destructive impulses the dominant
anxiety stops being about loss of self
and it begins to concern object loss the
clinical term for anxiety about object
loss is neurotic anxiety neurotic
organizations are dominated by guilt and
neurotic defenses tend to focus on
things like repression or reaction
formation that attempt to conceal
destructive impulses and Fantasies from
the self and from other people the main
developmental challenge at the neurotic
level is learning to tolerate loss and
also to create a realistic perspective
on the self's destru
capacities the person must learn that
angry or destructive fantasies and
impulses don't necessarily need to be
hidden from awareness they're Facts of
Life and they can be channeled in
productive directions that actually
enhance relationships rather than
destroy them the final level of
development is called healthy
organization at this level the focus is
on authenticity relationships and
self-actualization healthy organization
is characterized by flexibility and
affiliation the person relies on healthy
defenses that don't distort reality
don't blur boundaries and that aren't
overly concerned with hiding or
concealing authentic needs and feelings
instead healthy defenses focus on
strengthening social bonds and
channeling conflicts in productive
directions these include things like
humor alism and sublimation which is
when feelings like anger or frustration
are channeled into work art or Fitness
healthy individuals still have Central
wounds and core conflicts but they've
developed internal resources to manage
those conflicts in ways that are less
costly and provide benefit both to
themselves and to other people so in
this video we'll focus on the psychotic
level of organization as it presents in
narcissistic personality Styles remember
these are styles that are dominated by
vulnerabilities and self-esteem and The
Psychotic organization represents the
lowest level of personality development
and it also involves the most severe
symptoms thanks to popular media people
confuse the word psychotic with images
of stalkers serial killers or killer
clowns with red balloons but the term
simply means that someone has lost
contact with reality recognizing what is
real and what is not is a foundational
mental ability but it's not something
with which we're born very young
children don't have enough experience to
reliably distinguish fact from fiction
roughly speaking what are the odds that
a monster is hiding under your bed for
most adults that calculation occurs
almost
instantaneously but 5-year-olds on the
other hand might spend hours lying awake
at night trying to figure it out but
experience is only part of the story we
also need to grow and develop mental
functions that reliably track and
negotiate what's real and these are
sometimes called ego functions most of
us have adequate ego functions to
distinguish fact from fiction by the
time we're adults we don't fundamentally
alter our perception of the world when
we encounter stress for example getting
rejected from a job application can be
difficult to tolerate but we find ways
to accept the reality and move forward
that ability is due to our mature ego
functions someone without such
capacities might instead construct a
delusion to protect themselves from the
Intolerable reality of rejection perhaps
that the job rejected them because of a
government conspiracy to deprive them of
gainful employment the key to
understanding psychotic organization is
that the mind is not mature enough in
its ego functions to hold reality as a
constant instead it bends reality to
neutralize threats often altering
self-image and object relations in
dramatic ways in the process now I want
to be clear that I'm not necessarily
discussing psychotic disorders like
schizophrenia I'm discussing a level of
personality devel velopment that is
characterized by periodic or chronic
lapses in reality testing typically in
response to emotional distress or
perceived threat one article from 2014
puts it like this psychotic organization
is characterized by failure of defensive
regulation to contain the individual's
reaction to stressors leading to a
pronounced break with objective reality
end quote Otto kernberg who is generally
credited with introducing these Concepts
ceps writes that quote reality testing
is severely impaired in psychotic
organization end quot we all distort
reality in response to psychological
threats when we're young children often
have wildly unrealistic ideas about
themselves and about the world around
them they tend to treat thoughts and
actions as equivalent they may believe
that something happened simply because
they imagined it they may cope with
difficult Feelings by altering their
perception of events
when I was about 3 years old my parents
had just separated and I began to see
Phantom creatures floating across my
room at night they'd come out of one
wall move across the floor and then
disappear into the opposite wall I'd see
circus animals dragons unicorns and
other figures I called them shadows and
they were terrifying because I could see
them with my waking eyes these
hallucinations lasted for a period and
then one night they simply went away and
I never saw them again people tend to
shrug when I tell them about this kids
have vivid imaginations they have
imaginary friends they see things that
aren't there or sometimes selectively
don't see things that are there reality
is fluid when we're young it's a period
of development where our relationship
with reality is still being
negotiated given good enough experience
most people grow Beyond this psychotic
phase of development its Legacy remains
in the form of Whimsy art and creativity
however significant trauma in early life
can be disruptive to normal development
if things are too frightening or too
overwhelming if early experience is a
chaos of unreliable caregivers emotional
double binds or Unthinkable situations
that the Mind simply can't process then
the necessary ego functions may not
develop in a reliable way leaving the
adult personality vulnerable to
psychotic Distortion under stress people
with psychotic organizations don't
necessarily appear quote crazy or even
severely mentally ill their issues may
only become apparent when they encounter
a psychological threat in the case of
narcissistic personalities these issues
would most likely manifest when the
person experiences a situation that
threatens their self-esteem psychologist
and author Nancy McWilliams provides an
effective portrait of psychotic
organization she writes there are many
people walking around whose basic
psychotic level internal confusion does
not surface conspicuously unless they're
under considerable stress it's useful to
conceive of some people who may never
become diagnosa psychotic as
nevertheless living in a symbiotic
psychotic internal World they function
sometimes quite effectively but they
strike one as confused and deeply
terrified and their thinking feels
disorganized or paranoid end quote for
someone with a narcissistic personality
style who's organized at at The
Psychotic level insecurities about
self-worth May manifest in reality
distorting ways they may believe
themselves to be literally perfect
Invincible or to have special powers or
they may engage in disturbing
devaluations of self that are also not
reality based for example in some
individuals body dysmorphia can
represent a psychotic Distortion of
self-image psychotic distortions can
also affect the perception of social
relationships individuals may distort
interaction actions and events in the
service of perceiving themselves to be
perfect powerful rich or beautiful when
confronted with facts that disprove
their claims such individuals will
typically Retreat further into delusion
or engage in paranoid projections and
devaluations MC Williams notes that
psychotic process in such individuals is
quote preverbal and prerational and that
means that it belongs to a very early
stage of mental development she writes
that psychotically organized individuals
use reality distorting defenses to
protect against quote a level of
nameless dread so overwhelming that
psychotic distortions are less
terrifying than the dread against which
they defend this is another key in
understanding psychotic organization
these individuals are beset by profound
Terror that they can't verbalize or even
symbolize and by that I mean that the
actual anxieties can't properly be
represented in the individual's mind the
ego functions needed to do that that
simply haven't been developed the self
is too fragile too small and too
unintegrated to withstand troubling
realities instead distressing experience
must be expelled or disguised by
psychotic defenses this Terror or dread
is almost always existential and it's
the sort of fear that healthier
individuals tend to repress healthier
individuals also develop a self
structure that's resilient enough to
withstand its own fears of annihilation
but in psychotic organization the self
structure is not galvanized it doubts
its own existence MC Williams writes
they may not be fully sure that they
exist they are deeply confused about who
they are and they usually struggle with
basic issues of self- defin they cannot
depend on a sense of continuity of
identity in themselves and do not
experience others as having continuity
of self either when asked to describe
themselves or important people in their
lives they tend to be vague tangential
concrete or observably distorting the
critical thing for therapists to
appreciate is that close to the surface
in people with psychotic level
psychologies one finds both mortal fear
and dire confusion end quote as stated
previously psychotic organizations
involve paranoid anxiety which is
anxiety about loss of self they're
terrified of being obliterated
dissolving into non-being experiencing
traumatic loss of control over their
bodies or being taken over
psychologically this anxiety can easily
overwhelm the individual's rudimentary
ego functions leading to The Psychotic
distortions that characterize this level
of
organization The Psychotic self
structure is not developed enough to
hold strong feelings it must externalize
them or transform them into concrete
metaphors it can't take responsibility
for its own feelings it must view them
as coming from outside the self it can't
tolerate stressful or confusing
emotional contradictions it must split
the self to preserve a basic sense of
goodness or it must collapse ambiguity
into reality distorting one-dimensional
perceptions the weak or compromised ego
functions that characterize psychotic
organization also cause Reliance on
reality distorting defense mechanisms
The Psychotic defense mechanisms rating
scale or pdmrs is one way that
psychologists assess some of these
defenses now it's important to
understand that anyone could regress to
the use of one or two of these defenses
in the face of a severe crisis it's only
when a person tends to use these sorts
of defenses habitually that we begin to
suspect psychotic
organization here are some of the
defenses described by The
pdmrs Psychotic denial this is when a
person engages in wholesale denial of
any reality that is too frightening or
too stressful to tolerate an example of
this might be someone diagnosed with a
serious illness who fails to take even
minimal steps to address the diagnosis
and obtain treatment instead behaving
and feeling as though the diagnosis
never happened Distortion this is when a
person grossly Alters or reshapes
internal or external reality for example
I once got into a minor verbal conflict
with a man at a dog park he had parked
very close to my car and as a result I
wasn't able to open my door after
getting out the passenger sign I asked
him to please move his car which caused
him to become visibly agitated now I
wasn't doing anything threatening but
clearly he felt threatened by the mere
fact of my frustration out of the blue
he said you know what happens if you hit
me right I was taken aback because I
hadn't threatened to hit him I just
wanted him to move his car but the look
in his eye made me feel like I'd somehow
been abusing him for years even though
we'd never met then he pointed to the
dog sitting in his car and he spat he'll
rip your throat
out now this exchange was deeply
disturbing to me the man's reaction was
not reality based nothing about what was
happening would suggest to a reasonable
person that they were in any sort of
danger or that it would be appropriate
to say that their dog was going to rip
my throat out I could only assume that
in his mind I somehow represented a
grave threat to his physical safety I
became a concrete represent ation of his
internal fear and apprehension even
though I hadn't done anything to
threaten him our minor interpersonal
conflict set in motion a Cascade of
psychotic anxieties that caused him to
significantly distort
situation
concretization this is when a person
transforms a mental representation into
a concrete object situation or action
the concrete form is symbolically
related to a psychological wish or fear
many horror movies provide excellent
examples of concretized fears or
experiences that take physical form to
torment the main character for example
in the movie The babadook a mother
haunted by unprocessed grief and anger
is tormented by a physical manifestation
of her feelings which literally
possesses her and causes her to endanger
her
family psychotic fragmentation this is
when self-image object images and the
links between them become
fragmented such fragmentation produces a
disorganized and Confused narrative it
involves total splitting between
multiple self- States fracturing the
person into countless pieces that can't
be easily linked together someone
utilizing this defense may appear to
ramble incoherently to vacillate between
sudden and frighteningly intense
feelings and perceptions or to construct
narratives that seem to contain numerous
conflicting organizing
themes other defenses that are sometimes
considered psychotic include omnipotent
control this is an early defense
mechanism where the individual believes
they have absolute power over their
environment and other people use of this
defense in adulthood reflects a
regression to an infantile state of
primary narcissism where the child
believes they're the center of the
universe and the difference between the
real world and the self is obliterated
primitive idealization and
devaluation this is another early
defense mechanism that reflects the
young child's need to believe that
caregivers are all powerful and capable
of protecting them from all the dangers
of Life normal idealization is an
essential component of mature love and
represents an adult remnant of the
extreme primitive idealizations that
occur in childhood however when reality
defying wholesale idealizations continue
to occur in adulthood it reflects the
mind's inability to negotiate the
disappointing limitations of the self
and other people or the person's need to
believe that a perfect all powerful
figure in their life can protect them
from the paranoid anxieties that
threaten to overwhelm The Fragile self
primitive devaluation is the other side
of the coin the fantasized Perfection of
the idealized self or idealized object
will eventually collapse into an equally
distorted
devaluation primitive forms of
projection and
introjection these represent early
defense mechanisms that intensely blur
the boundaries between the self and
other people they come from a very early
period in psychological development
before we've discerned Which experiences
are coming from inside the self and
which are coming from the external World
these defenses are powerful but also
costly because they disrupt
relationships most of us only use them
under extreme
circumstances we tend to project when
something coming from inside the self is
too threatening and we introject when
something is so emotionally disruptive
that it overwhelms our ego boundaries
the extent of reality Distortion is what
distinguishes primitive projection from
non psychotic forms of projection for
example individuals who exhibit extreme
xenophobia racism or paranoid obsessions
about immigrants or quote others who
they believe are attacking them and
against whom they feel they must defend
are sometimes experiencing a psychotic
form of projection in which the others
typically possess qualities that the
individuals themselves are attempting to
disown primitive introjection is
essentially the reverse of projection it
involves perceiving something that is
outside the self as coming from inside
the self individuals with psychotic
organizations have extremely porous
sometimes basically non-existent
boundaries they can be profoundly
confused about what is inside the self
and what is not what boundaries they do
have can be easily overwhelmed in the
face of threatening or emotionally
disruptive experience experiences I once
worked with a patient who experienced
any confrontation as a dire threat when
I would make even basic interpretations
or challenges in treatment their face
would contort into a Grimace their body
posture would shift into a defensive
hunch and they would glare as though
suddenly filled with decades worth of
resentment in these moments the patient
was injecting the aggression that they
perceived to be coming from me healthier
individuals might feel a bit confronted
by a difficult interpretation and
treatment they might even imagine that I
was mad at them but they would also have
the ego functions to sort out what was
mine and what was theirs but this
patient was psychotically organized and
unable to perceive those distinctions my
perceived anger bypassed their ego
boundaries entirely and became their
anger they were in a way fused with it
and they embodied it in real time
another patient had a controlling parent
who routinely obliterated their
boundaries when they were young as an
adult they could sometimes quote hear
that parent voice speaking in the
background of their thoughts it felt
like the controlling domineering parent
was somehow inside of them the voice
speaking on its own but also in a way
that felt fused with their own thoughts
there are other defenses that could
probably be included here because they
sometimes take on a psychotic quality
but the focus of this channel is
pathological narcissism and NPD so I I
want to spend a few minutes discussing
that
specifically first we would
automatically assume that someone with a
narcissistic personality style organized
at The Psychotic level has NPD
personality disorders are generally
conceptualized as occurring exclusively
in the psychotic and borderline ranges
of functioning at these levels the ego
functions are not sufficiently developed
to contain and channel the person's core
conflicts instead the individual is
chronically overwhelmed by them and
tends to express them via maladaptive
strategies and the use of problematic
defenses a psychotic individual with NPD
would rely on many of the defenses
discussed in this video their self-image
would be notably distorted whether in a
positive or negative Direction they
would be prone to periodic experiences
of psychotic fragmentation during which
they would appear to lose coherence in
their
self-concept they would be preoccupied
with paranoid anxiety about loss of self
or collapse of their self-image many of
these preoccupations would involve
reality distorting defenses they would
likely have obsessions about quote
others paranoid beliefs about immigrants
people of other races or criminals onto
whom they had projected many of their
own negative qualities they would also
likely be prone to reality bending
grandios that were obvious Fabrications
their grandiosity would have a detached
from reality quality they might call
themselves perfect they might believe
themselves to be a God on Earth the
second coming of Jesus or other deity or
a long awaited hero who will save the
Earth conversely a psychotic person with
NPD might believe themselves to be
hideously grotesque they might
experience obsessions or body dysmorphia
that lead them to engage in self harm or
self-mutilation multiple plastic
surgeries dangerous diets Etc psychotic
NPD can also present with severe illness
anxiety or other disord ERS that take on
a reality distorting quality psychotic
individuals regardless of Personality
style often have a history of attempts
to self-medicate using drugs and alcohol
now in some ways the appearance of
psychotically organized individuals is
similar across all personality Styles
and this is because of how early in
development these issues are thought to
originate essentially freezing parts of
the personality in a Proto or
undeveloped State psychotically
organized individuals are intolerant of
their own selfhood the Mind
unconsciously attacks its own abilities
to make meaning out of experience
there's an intense and primitive fear of
both being a self and also of dissolving
into non-being because the immature self
structure present in psychotically
organized individuals can cause such
abject confusion and fear it can
actually cause those around them to take
a caretaking role to be clear psychotic
individuals are typically at risk for
abuse from other people however
individuals in this range of functioning
can also be unpredictable impulsive or
even dangerous under the right
circumstances they may believe that
they're fighting for their very survival
in situations where most people would
only be mildly anxious recall the man
who threatened to have his dog tear my
throat out because I asked him to move
his car if you begin to suspect that a
person is psychotic then it's best to
avoid confrontations it's likely that
they won't be able to engage in rational
or productive discourse they will more
likely perceive your confrontation as a
threat confusing it with already
terrifying primitive anxieties that
can't be effectively managed the best
thing to do is to be supportive but
boundaried offer reassurances if the
person is frightened and seek help if
the person is a danger to themselves or
to someone else you might be wondering
if psychotic organizations can be healed
I think the answer is yes but it takes a
long time psychotic organizations
represent profound developmental arrests
the person simply hasn't had the right
experiences over long enough periods of
time to help them grow and develop the
necessary ego functions to cope the good
news is that our minds want to develop
to use the language of Carl Rogers
there's an actualizing tendency in all
living things with time and Care a
person can develop the abilities they
lack progressing to the next
developmental level requ requires ego
functions that are capable of handling
distress without warping reality or
obliterating the distinction between
what's inside and what's outside the
South all of this is possible and there
are documented cases of people who have
done this work and who've come out the
other side so if you recognize these
qualities in yourself or a loved one
don't despair the next video in this
series will discuss borderline
organization which represents the next
step on the developmental Continuum
toward healthy psychology
as always leave questions or comments
and until next time take good care
[Music]